# mechanical1
Mechanical








Case Study Problem
 
Table of Contents
1. Introduction	4
2. Mesh Strategy	4
3. Simulation Set Up for the CFD Solver	8
4. Boundary Conditions	8
5. Solver Setting	12
6. Post-Process CFD Result	14
6.1 Result for 1.5 atm input	14
6.2 Result for 5 atm input	16
6.3 Result for 10 atm input	18
6.4 Result for 15 atm input	20
6.5 Result for 40 atm input	22
7. Comparison	23
8. Conclusion	24
References	25

 
List of Figures
Figure 1: Generated Mesh for the CFD analysis	4
Figure 2: Mesh Element Metrics	5
Table 1: Mesh Strategies	7
Table 2: Mesh Controls	7
Figure 3: Project Schema as simulation set up for the CFD	8
Figure 4: Named Selection of the boundaries	9
Figure 5: Applied Boundary Conditions as pressure inlet	9
Figure 6: Inlet ambient Temperature	10
Figure 7: Pressure Outlet	11
Figure 8: Solution Method and Viscous Model for the Simulation	12
Figure 9: Run calculation using 500 iterations	13
Figure 10: Pressure distribution due to applied 1.5 ATM inlet pressure	14
Figure 11: Velocity distribution due to applied 1.5 ATM inlet pressure	14
Figure 12: Pressure distribution due to applied 5 ATM inlet pressure	15
Figure 13: Velocity distribution due to applied 5 ATM inlet pressure	16
Figure 14: Pressure distribution due to applied 10 ATM inlet pressure	16
Figure 15: Velocity distribution due to applied 10 ATM inlet pressure	17
Figure 16: Pressure distribution due to applied 15 ATM inlet pressure	17
Figure 17: Velocity distribution due to applied 15 ATM inlet pressure	18
Figure 18: Pressure distribution due to applied 40 ATM inlet pressure	19
Figure 19: Velocity distribution due to applied 40 ATM inlet pressure	19
Table 3: Comparison	20
 
1. Introduction
This report encompasses understanding the flow field by analysing a simplified converging-diverging nozzle geometry through varying inlet pressures using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). Converging-diverging nozzles are extensively employed in aerospace and propulsion applications because the flow velocity in these nozzles can be accelerated up to supersonic velocities. The simulation is done with ANSYS and created for the nozzle geometry structured mesh. Five different inlet pressure conditions are analysed: 1.5 atm, 5 atm, 10 atm, 15 atm, and 40 atm. By comparing the pressure and velocity fields and the thrust generated by the nozzle, the performance of the nozzle is determined. The results of the simulation are then compared to the particular theoretical values about subsonic, choked and supersonic flows. This paper sheds light on the workings of a C-D nozzle: a demonstration of how changes to inlet pressures will influence the flow characteristics and efficiency of the nozzle in question.
2. Mesh Strategy 
 
Figure 1: Generated Mesh for the CFD analysis 
(Source: Ansys)

 
Figure 2: Mesh Element Metrics
(Source: Ansys)
Object Name	Mesh
State	Solved
Display
Display Style	Use Geometry Setting
Defaults
Physics Preference	CFD
Solver Preference	Fluent
Element Order	Linear
Element Size	0.5 mm
Export Format	Standard
Export Preview Surface Mesh	No
Sizing
Use Adaptive Sizing	No
Growth Rate	Default (1.2)
Mesh Defeaturing	Yes
Defeature Size	Default (2.5e-003 mm)
Capture Curvature	Yes
Curvature Min Size	Default (5.e-003 mm)
Curvature Normal Angle	Default (18.0°)
Capture Proximity	No
Bounding Box Diagonal	107.7 mm
Average Surface Area	2170.1 mm²
Minimum Edge Length	9.0838 mm
Quality
Check Mesh Quality	Yes, Errors
Target Skewness	0.9
Smoothing	High
Mesh Metric	Element Quality
Min	0.41792
Max	0.99947
Average	0.90176
Standard Deviation	0.10095
Inflation
Use Automatic Inflation	None
Inflation Option	Smooth Transition
Transition Ratio	0.272
Maximum Layers	2
Growth Rate	1.2
Inflation Algorithm	Pre
View Advanced Options	No
Batch Connections
Mesh Based Connection	No
Advanced
Number of CPUs for Parallel Part Meshing	Program Controlled
Straight Sided Elements	
Rigid Body Behaviour	Dimensionally Reduced
Triangle Surface Mesher	Program Controlled
Topology Checking	Yes
Use Sheet Thickness for Pinch	No
Pinch Tolerance	Default (4.5e-003 mm)
Generate Pinch on Refresh	No
Sheet Loop Removal	No
Statistics
Nodes	15086
Elements	14433
Table 1: Mesh Strategies
(Source: Ansys)

Object Name	Edge Sizing	Automatic Method
State	Fully Defined
Scope
Scoping Method	Geometry Selection
Geometry	7 Edges	1 Body
Definition
Suppressed	No
Type	Number of Divisions	 
Number of Divisions	200	 
Method	 	Quadrilateral Dominant
Element Order	 	Linear
Free Face Mesh Type	 	Quad/Tri
Advanced
Behaviour	Soft	 
Growth Rate	Default (1.2)	 
Capture Curvature	No	 
Capture Proximity	No	 
Bias Type	No Bias	 
Table 2: Mesh Controls
(Source: Ansys)
3. Simulation Set Up for the CFD Solver
 	 
Figure 3: Project Schema as simulation set up for the CFD
(Source: Ansys)
This figure shows the project schema utilised to create the contextual framework for the CFD simulation. It illustrates the various components that are engaged in the simulation process about the geometrical construction, mesh generation physic description and final analysis and result processing. The structured workflow provides the correct format of laying down components and running them consecutively to obtain the right emulation outcomes (Khalid, and Ahsan, 2020).
4. Boundary Conditions
 
Figure 4: Named Selection of the boundaries 
(Source: Ansys)
In the figure there described the labelled boundaries concerned with the nozzle geometry applied to the CFD analysis. Individual components like inlet, outlet and wall sections are also properly named so that while defining the boundary conditions during the simulation setup they can be easily identified.
 
Figure 5: Applied Boundary Conditions as pressure inlet 
(Source: Ansys)
This figure also depicts the pressure inlet boundary condition used in the study of the nozzle. This specific inlet pressure is assumed according to case study values with minimum value ounces 1.5 atm and maximum value ounces 40 atm. This is important in mimicking the forces that different pressure impacts through the converging-diverging nozzle.
 
Figure 6: Inlet Temperature 
(Source: Ansys)
In the figure, there is the stagnant temperature condition on the inlet which has been set to 600 K. In the analysis, coupled with pressure conditions, the inlet temperature is used for all thermal-based simulations of the fluid in the nozzle which reflects on velocity and pressure.
 
Figure 7: Pressure Outlet
(Source: Ansys)
This figure indicates for pressure boundary condition, specified as the pressure outlet boundary condition at 1 atm. The outlet boundary plays an important role in determining how the fluid discharges from the nozzle and the field environment in determining the final flow characteristics (Khan et al. 2024).
5. Solver Setting
 
Figure 8: Solution Method and Viscous Model for the Simulation 
(Source: Ansys)
The figure shows the solver settings and more so before focusing on the solution method, and the next is the viscous model. This explains the required usage of an approximate turbulence model (presumably k-epsilon or similar) as well as the discretisation schemes for capturing the behaviour of the fluid flow in the nozzle with the consideration of the viscosity (Kore et al. 2021).
 
Figure 9: Run calculation using 250 iterations 
(Source: Ansys)
This figure shows the configuration by which to run the simulation, which has a property named iteration count, specifying 250. The use of more iterations increases the relaxation factors with improved convergence and accuracy in the results obtained, making it possible for the solver to predict the steady-state flow through the nozzle after the fluctuations have stabilized (Nordin, and Hakimi, 2022).
6. Post-Process CFD Result 
6.1 Result for 1.5 atm input 
 
Figure 10: Pressure distribution due to applied 1.5 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The pressure distribution obtained is maximum at 150902 Pa and minimum at - 513568 Pa, so supersonic conditions prevail here. This pressure variation represents a reasonably growing flow within the nozzle, the fluid acceleration from subsonic to supersonic states (Das et al. 2021).
 
Figure 11: Velocity distribution due to applied 1.5 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The maximum velocity is 936 m/s, which proves that the flow is very close to supersonic speed. This confirms that even at low inlet pressure, the nozzle accelerates the flow efficiently to nearly sonic velocity in the throat area due to the converging-diverging geometry.
6.2 Result for 5 atm input 
 
Figure 12: Pressure distribution due to applied 5 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The pressure rises to the maximum of 503, 551Pa and lowers to the minimum of -1,376,160 Pa speaking about pressure drop and shock formation. This is a direct result of supersonic expansion beyond the throat region, and a further enhancement of flow divergence in the nozzle.

 
Figure 13: Velocity distribution due to applied 5 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The maximum velocity is around 1,575m/sec; therefore, the flow is supersonic to the maximum extent. A nozzle intensifies the newly introduced velocity to faster velocities owing to the new higher inlet pressure which might shock patterns downstream in the divergent section.
6.3 Result for 10 atm input 
 
Figure 14: Pressure distribution due to applied 10 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
For the pressure distribution with 10-atm inlet pressure, the pressure difference is at its maximum of 1,007,450 Pa and its minimum, -2,524,850 Pa thus showing a stronger pressure gradient. This suggests further supersonic expansion downstream with a decrease in pressure across the divergent section of the nozzle.
 
Figure 15: Velocity distribution due to applied 10 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The velocity rises to 2,160 m/s, which characterizes highly accelerated flow, or supersonic one. The arrangement of the nozzle throughputs this strategy enhances the change of pressure energy to kinetic energy resulting in increased fluid speed, especially in zones of lower inlet pressure.

6.4 Result for 15 atm input 
 
Figure 16: Pressure distribution due to applied 15 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The maximal pressure is equal to 1,511,400 PA and the minimal pressure is equal to -3,673,120 PA which speaks about a rather high-pressure difference. This is a strong signal for the intensive expansion and shock wave generation in a supersonic regime in a flow moving through the working part of the nozzle.
 
Figure 17: Velocity distribution due to applied 15 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The highest velocity achieved is 2,617 m/s of very high velocity as the fluid leaves the nozzle. The converging-diverging shape enables a high velocity with a particular widening at this high inlet pressure.




6.5 Result for 40 atm input 
 
Figure 18: Pressure distribution due to applied 40 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The pressure reaches the maximum level of 4,031,310 Pa whereas the minimum one is significantly lower, -9,204,520 Pa, which proves that this case has the largest differences between maximum and minimum pressure values. This much thought pressure difference implies large expansion, shock creation and high-velocity flow at high inlet pressure.
 
Figure 19: Velocity distribution due to applied 40 ATM inlet pressure
(Source: Ansys)
The maximum velocity peaks at 4,182 m/s verifying supersonic conditions throughout the nozzle. This high-speed flow is indicative of the ability to use the geometry of the nozzle to amplify the fluid blend under very high-pressure input that produces velocities.
7. Comparison
Input	Maximum Pressure	Minimum Pressure 	Maximum Velocity 
Result for 1.5 atm input	150902	-513568	936
Result for 5 atm input	503551	-1376160	1575
Result for 10 atm input	1007450	-2524850	2160
Result for 15 atm input	1511400	-3673120	2617
Result for 40 atm input 	4031310	-9204520	4182
Table 3: Comparison
(Source: Self-Created)
The CFD performance comparison of the converging-diverging nozzle for different inlet pressures is displayed in Figure 9 which ranges from an inlet pressure of 1.5 atm to 40 atm and analyses the flow behaviour transitions from subsonic to highly supersonic modes.
1.5 atm is at the near sonic state of the nozzle according to the max velocity of the nozzle of 936 m/s. By comparing the figures of pressure distribution, it is illustrated that there is moderate expansion in the diverging section, maximum pressure of 150,902 Pa and the minimum pressure, -513568 Pa has been observed. The flow starts passing to the supersonic regime, though not very high due to the higher inlet pressure as compared with heights (Das et al. 2021).
At an inlet pressure of 5 atm, the flow through the nozzle is continuously at supersonic conditions at the exit the velocity reaches as high as 1575 m/s. Based on pressure distribution, a significant increase in pressure differential with a maximum of 503551Pa and minimum of -1376160Pa points towards the enhanced shock formation expansion. This increases at the rate of 10 atm where the flow increases to 2160 ms, reaching a farther decreased pressure although demonstrating intense supper sonic behavior. The pressure disturbances range (maximum of 1007450 Pa, and minimum of -2524850 Pa) vindicates the existence of shocks and expansions in the nozzle.
At 15 atm it attains a velocity of 2617m/s and the pressure differential is much higher (up to 1,511,400 Pa and down to -3,673,120 Pa) thus proving that the nozzle is capable of handling pressure flows efficiently. At 40 atm, the nozzle is in supersonic conditions with the maximal velocity of the flow, 4,182 m/s, and pressure drop to -9,204,520 PA. The nozzle greatly expands the gas thus facilitating highly efficient acceleration of the gas.

In general, the findings compare with theory, as higher inlet pressure results in higher velocity and pressure gradient, and supersonic flow is seen in the nozzle across various pressures (Khan et al. 2024).
8. Conclusion 
The CFD simulation of the nozzle design within the converging-diverging geometry with the change in the inlet pressure shows the change from the subsonic to supersonic flows with corresponding pressure drop and velocity rise as the inlet pressure increases. In low pressures, the flow is close to sonic; at higher pressures (5-40 atm) shock formation and intensive expansion are observed. The nozzle geometry is directly involved in the conversion of pressure energy to kinetic energy and the process reaches velocities of 4182 m/s at 40atm. The results simulated by the software match well with theoretic expectations for nozzle dynamics and also corroborate the concept that inlet pressure aids flow acceleration and efficiency when operating in supersonic ranges. This analysis reveals how the nozzle suffices in control of the outlet thrust for better performance under different operating conditions. 
References
Das, B.D., Sardar, R., Sarkar, S. and Manna, N.K., 2021. Compressible flow through the convergent-divergent nozzle. In Theoretical, Computational, and Experimental Solutions to Thermo-Fluid Systems: Select Proceedings of ICITFES 2020 (pp. 345-353). Springer Singapore.
Khalid, M.W. and Ahsan, M., 2020. Computational fluid dynamics analysis of compressible flow through a converging-diverging nozzle using the k-ε turbulence model. Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research, 10(1), pp.5180-5185.
Khan, S.A., Ali, J.S.M. and Sapardi, M.A.M., 2024. Influence of Cavity on Base Pressure Manipulation in Suddenly Expanded Flow from Converging Diverging Nozzle for Area Ratio 5.29. Journal of Advanced Research in Fluid Mechanics and Thermal Sciences, 114(2), pp.32-49.
Kore, R., Patil, S., Victor, V., Suresh, S. and Bajaj, D.K., 2021, December. CFD Investigation in CD Nozzle at Different Convergence Angles and Constant Divergence Angle and Throat Diameter. In 2021 IEEE Pune Section International Conference (PuneCon) (pp. 1-7). IEEE.
Nordin, N. and Hakimi, M.A., 2022. Effect of Flow Compressibility in Convergent-Divergent Nozzle. Journal of Complex Flow, 4(2), pp.33-38.



